The Game of Thrones actor Kristofer Hivju, who played the role of Tormund, has tested positive for the new coronavirus and is doing well, the Norwegian said in an Instagram post.
The 41-year-old known for his fiery red hair and beard said he and his family were in self-isolation at home.
“We are in good health — I only have mild symptoms of a cold,” he wrote in a message accompanied by a photograph of him with his smiling wife, Gry Molvaer Hivju.
The actor, whose major breakthrough came with the hit series, took the opportunity to remind his followers of good habits to practice in coronavirus times: wash hands, keep a social distance of 1.5 metres, and respect quarantine rules, among other things.
“Together we can fight this virus and avert a crisis at our hospitals,” he said.

  










 View this post on Instagram


















 
 Greetings from Norway! Sorry to say that I, today, have tested positive for COVID19, Corona virus. My familiy and I are self-isolating at home for as long as it takes. We are in good health – I only have mild symptoms of a cold. There are people at higher risk for who this virus might be a devastating diagnosis, so I urge all of you to be extremely careful; wash your hands, keep 1,5 meters distance from others, go in quarantine; just do everything you can to stop the virus from spreading. Together we can fight this virus and avert a crisis at our hospitals. Please take care of each other, keep your distance, and stay healthy! Please visit your country's Center for Disease Control's website, and follow the regulations for staying safe and protecting not just yourselves, but our entire community, and especially those at risk like the elderly and people with pre-existing conditions. @grymolvaerhivju #fightcorona #solidarity #takecare #folkehelseinstituttet Thanks to @panoramaagency
A post shared by  Kristofer Hivju (@khivju) on Mar 16, 2020 at 1:48pm PDT



On Monday, Norway said 1,308 cases had been detected and three people have died in the Scandinavian country.
A number of other Hollywood celebrities have tested positive for the virus, including US actor Tom Hanks, who was released from an Australian hospital on Tuesday after being held in isolation since last week. Hank’s wife Rita Wilson also tested positive as well as stars such as Idris Elba, Kristofer Hivju and Olga Kurylenko.
READ NEXT: Full list of actors, politicians and sports stars with coronavirus
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.