A Richards Bay Primary School learner tested positive Covid-19 following confirmation received from lab test results, Zululand Observer reported.
It is reported that the learner and the doctor, who treated the learner, are in quarantine.
Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu confirmed the school was on lockdown after 17 pupils in the same class began showing potential symptoms of infection.
“We can confirm one Grade R leaner from Richards Bay Primary tested positive. We understand her mother works at one of the banks and deals with the foreign exchange of money,” said Mshengu.
This comes after Health Minister Dr Zweli Mkhize announced that 62 confirmed and verified cases of Covid-19 in the country on Monday morning.
However, Mkize did not confirm whether the learner was the 62nd case of Covid-19 in the country, but did say there were more cases which are yet to be verified.
“We also wish to mention that there are two cases of local transmission which have been presented to the NICD. These are under investigation.
“We are in the process of conducting confirmation tests and establishing their direct contacts and those whom they have subsequently come into contact with. All the patients have been advised and contact tracing is underway,” Mkhize said in a statement.
Mkhize also commented on the South Africans being repatriated from Wuhan, China, saying the people were swabbed for testing for Covid-19.
“We now await the outcome of their results, but our medical team has assured us that they found them to be medically fit when they conducted their examinations on them.”
The health minister said people suffering from lung disease were more vulnerable to the virus.
“It important to alert all our citizens that individuals with other existing medical conditions such as chronic lung disease and immune suppression are more vulnerable and may experience severe symptoms if infected with Covid-19.
“Secondly, the overall fatality rate of Covid-19 is estimated to be 1-3%,” said Mkhize.
He said approximately 15% of those who develop disease required hospitalisation and that most cases would require self-quarantine at home.
Mkhize further acknowledged the cooperation and partnership by various stakeholders, including the private sector, NGOs and department of labour.
He said the government would continue to assess the progression of the virus outbreak and urged people to work together.
“We need not panic and be engulfed by fear, but at the same time we cannot be complacent,” said Mkhize.
READ NEXT: School closures not a holiday, we can turn kitchens into classrooms – Lesufi.

Media Statement 16 March 2020 (1/2) pic.twitter.com/FY0lN9v8bh
— Dr Zweli Mkhize (@DrZweliMkhize) March 16, 2020


Media Statement 16 March 2020 (1/2) pic.twitter.com/fiXNkmJnis
— Dr Zweli Mkhize (@DrZweliMkhize) March 16, 2020

For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.