The country has eagerly been awaiting news on whether the current lockdown will be extended from its initially announced end date of next Thursday, 16 April.
The country’s frayed nerves were not helped this week by Ramaphosa joking with journalists on Tuesday that although he had said the lockdown would end on 16 April, he had not said what year it would be.
Ramaphosa said this week he still had to make “serious decisions” about the lockdown after considering all the options based on scientific modelling, advice and the economic impact of the lockdown, suggesting government is yet to make up its mind about lifting the lockdown, or even just easing it. The restrictions have put a stranglehold on an economy that was already in distress before the coronavirus pandemic hit the world.
Government has said it will only be able to assess the effectiveness of the initial 21-day lockdown in the days ahead, suggesting any announcement about ending this lockdown as planned or extending it will only come next week.
The presidency’s spokesperson has warned South Africa against “fake news on social media” about any address by Ramaphosa. Spokesperson Khusela Diko pointed out that an official advisory would have been sent if something so important were going to happen.

The Presidency issues an advisory when the President @CyrilRamaphosa will address the nation. In the absence of such advisory like now kindly regard all WhatsApp and SMS messages doing the rounds as #FakeNews
— Khusela Diko???????? (@KhuselaS) April 9, 2020

“Anything other than an official advisory is fake news,” she said.
The only planned activity for the president on Thursday that was announced was his trip to the department of health’s Covid-19 Information Centre at the CSIR.
The data from this centre will play a significant role in any future decisions the National Command Council will take.











#COVID19 | The data and insights generated by the centre are a significant input for decision-making by the #NationalCommandCouncil chaired by the President. pic.twitter.com/eTDru24Z9r
— Presidency | South Africa ???????? (@PresidencyZA) April 9, 2020


President @CyrilRamaphosa visits the the Department of Health (DoH)’s COVID-19 Information Centre at the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) to assess, a data centre set up to monitor and track the spread of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) in the country. https://t.co/s36iXyb72w
— Presidency | South Africa ???????? (@PresidencyZA) April 9, 2020