In a statement on Saturday night, Health Minister Zweli Mkhize said that the total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in South Africa had risen to 1,585.
“This is an increase of 80 from the previously reported cases,” he added. The confirmed number of deaths was still at nine.



The total number of Covid-19 tests conducted to date is at 53,937.



Provincial breakdown.
The deaths so far.






“We have received a report from KZN Health MEC Ms Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu that KwaZulu-Natal has 11 confirmed Covid-19 cases linked to St Augustine’s Hospital, in Durban. Furthermore, three of the deceased patients from KZN had been admitted at the hospital.
“The Covid-19-positive cases include patients, health workers and other staff members. The KZN Department of Health and Netcare management agreed that the sections of the hospital affected be closed and no new patient admissions be permitted. This is a precautionary measure to allow for a thorough identification of areas within the hospital where there may have been infection control lapses.”
The areas that were exposed to positive patients were also being disinfected. At this stage more than 150 tests had been conducted within the hospital and contact tracing was under way.
“We have advised that more tests be done on both staff and patients in order to determine the true extent of the existence of the infection in the facility, which may call for further interventions.
“As part of intensifying the contact tracing and testing process, MEC Simelane-Zulu has also requested that Netcare avails a list of its patients that were exposed to the hospital as from the beginning of March. We therefore make a public announcement that if you were a patient at St Augustine’s Hospital from 1 March 2020 to date, we request that you contact the KZN Department of Health.






“We convey our deepest condolences to the families and loved ones of the deceased. We also thank the doctors, health workers and all staff members of this hospital for their commitment to serve even during these difficult times.”



For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.