The motive behind the #Imstaying campaigners is salutary. But it is doomed to fail. The question is: who are they representing with their disillusioned approach? It can only be those still fortunate enough to have a job, own a home, drive a car. And afford a holiday in one of the best climates in the world. And with plenty food and entertainment. Sure, reason enough to stay. If they had asked the rural poor reasons why they’re staying, the answer would undoubtedly be different. What have they to stay for? Empty stomachs? Shanty homes? Schools far from home? No transport?...The motive behind the #Imstaying campaigners is salutary. But it is doomed to fail.
The question is: who are they representing with their disillusioned approach?
It can only be those still fortunate enough to have a job, own a home, drive a car. And afford a holiday in one of the best climates in the world. And with plenty food and entertainment. Sure, reason enough to stay.
If they had asked the rural poor reasons why they’re staying, the answer would undoubtedly be different. What have they to stay for? Empty stomachs? Shanty homes? Schools far from home? No transport? No jobs? Tribal murders?
See, dear stayers, the irony of ironies, the government they put into power has let them down.
Monies earmarked for the promised place in the sun are brazenly being plundered by the ANC. It has created a league of its own, joining forces with crooked partners in all walks of life, even holding hands with so-called religious businesspeople who pray at the workplace while emptying out the vaults of millions of rands that could’ve been spent on raising the living standard of the poor.
They are in cahoots with conmen as far away as India to hijack the economy of the country.
And they are still in power, continuing on their merry old way, with no answer to bankrupt and corrupted SOEs, municipalities and runaway crime. And an education system unable to educate.
No, stayers, what you should spend your energies on is persuading the nation (not forgetting the poor, hey?) to help getting shot of a government.
We are an unhappy bunch.
We are pessimistic.
We are angry.
We’ve had enough.
Now is an ideal opportunity for the stayers (who evidently still have the energy) to mobilise the nation to take to the streets and give the government and main opposition (the DA in hiding) an ultimatum: “We’ll stay, if you get your act together”.
That makes more sense. A flowery hashtag only serves as cover-up of a dismal situation.
It does not reflect the real goings-on of a useless government.
Get this right and nobody would even consider leaving.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.