While her father’s dying wish may have been that those responsible for his son’s death get “nailed”, for Neil Aggett’s sister – the only surviving member of the struggle activist’s immediate family – all that matters is the truth. Speaking on the sidelines of proceedings in the High Court in Johannesburg yesterday, after the newly reopened inquest into the unionist and doctor’s 1982 death in apartheid police custody got under way, Jill Burger said she had been plagued by anxiety in the weeks leading up to the start of the case. “I’ve lived in England now since 1983 so I’ve...While her father’s dying wish may have been that those responsible for his son’s death get “nailed”, for Neil Aggett’s sister – the only surviving member of the struggle activist’s immediate family – all that matters is the truth.
Speaking on the sidelines of proceedings in the High Court in Johannesburg yesterday, after the newly reopened inquest into the unionist and doctor’s 1982 death in apartheid police custody got under way, Jill Burger said she had been plagued by anxiety in the weeks leading up to the start of the case.
“I’ve lived in England now since 1983 so I’ve been there for a long time and away from everything that was going on here. Knowing I was coming back to it dredged up all those painful memories,” she said.
“On the other hand I’m overjoyed that we’re actually getting this process started. And if it leads to the truth, that is what I’m seeking more than anything.
“The truth of how he died and why they relentlessly pursued him, without a break. Why was it necessary to torture this gentle, humanist man who was only really interested in helping people?”
Aggett and his girlfriend, Elizabeth Floyd, were arrested by the apartheid police’s security branch in November 1981.
More than two months later, on 5 February 1982, he was found hanging in his cell at the infamous John Vorster Square (now Johannesburg Central police station).
His death was initially ruled a suicide but after intense pressure from his family and civil society, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development, Ronald Lamola, last year agreed to request the judge president re-open the inquest into Aggett’s death.
“He was so strong, so stubborn. He just couldn’t have [killed himself],” Burger said, “On his deathbed, my father said: ‘I hope they nail those bastards’. That’s how convinced he was”.
Ahmed Timol’s nephew bemoans NPA’s tardiness

Imtiaz Cajee, nephew of the late anti-apartheid activist Ahmed Timol, who was present in court yesterday, said “the fact is that it is disgraceful that it has taken so long [to have the inquest reopened]”.
“The Aggett issue was brought to the attention of the National Prosecuting Authority [NPA] in 2016, so why has the inquest taken four years?
“Apartheid-era security branch policeman Steve Whitehead is dead so he will not be able to testify!”
He said while the details of other inquests were not clear, so was the date of the inquest into Dr Hoosen Hasajee’s death, a Pietermaritzburg anti-apartheid activist who was the 45th detainee to die in prison.
He said it was also revealed in court that over 400 cases were reported to the NPA.
“This is concerning to the other families. They are worried about when it will be their turn,” he said.
The NPA could not be reached for comment.– bernadettew@citizen.co.za 

For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.