Residents are speculating about what really happened during an armed robbery at Sasol on Sunday morning, reports Ridge Times.
According to Sasol’s spokesperson, Alex Anderson, an armed robbery took place at about 1am on Sunday at the Solvents Sasol Unit (SSU).
The Ridge Times asked Sasol’s communications department how the robbers gained access to Sasol, if they had firearms, and for how long Sasol’s gates were closed, but Anderson said that unfortunately they could not give all the information sought, as robbery investigations were still ongoing
He said there were no serious injuries, and the robbers’ attempt was not successful.
The Ridge Times has heard, however, that four vehicles were stolen, of which two were recovered in Leandra by SIPRU Security, with backup from Sasol Security, Fidelity and the Secunda Police’s flying squad.
Anderson further said that the incident was managed according to internal procedures, and that Sasol is providing counselling support to all its employees.
“Investigations are underway and all the relevant authorities have been informed.
“Sasol remains committed to the safety and health of its employees, community and environment.”
The question on many residents’ lips is, however, how the armed robbers gained access into the primary area of the plant, especially with Sasol being considered a national key point.
Some of the rumours currently circulating include a cash-in-transit heist, as well as a version of the story that 11 armed men entered Sasol by threatening the security guards with firearms and overpowering them.
They then reportedly went to the primary area of Sasol, made their way to one of the control rooms in the plant, and tied up the employees in that room.
They were allegedly looking for a chemical element that is rare and expensive.
The robbers allegedly fled with the four vehicles, including security bakkies and an employee’s private car, when they could not find this chemical element.
Sasol allegedly flies this sought-after chemical element into the country via helicopter.
Updates to follow as more information becomes available.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.