The mountain Pieter Malan had to climb to make his Test debut for South Africa has clearly made him a very grounded person and the 30-year-old provided some wonderful perspective on his far-from-easy career after his stoic innings of 84 in more than six hours in the Proteas second innings of the second Test against England at Newlands.
Making his debut on his adopted home ground completed a journey that took the eldest of three talented brothers – the others being Andre and Janneman – from Nelspruit to Pretoria and then to Cape Town.
Malan moved from Hoërskool Nelspruit to Waterkloof when his parents relocated to Pretoria for his final two years of schooling and duly made the SA Schools team in 2006/7.
ALSO READ: Legendary Kallis has high praise for ‘fighter’ Malan
He made his first-class debut for Northerns that season but even though he went on to score 12 centuries in 50 matches for them, he just could not convert his prodigious talent into consistent success at franchise level.
He only played 21 times for the powerful Titans outfit, averaging just 26.21.
But a move to Western Province in 2013/14 proved the turning point in his career and within a year he was playing for the Cape Cobras. For the last five seasons he has averaged over 40 for them and when his Test chance finally came, he was clearly ready.
He will not experience much more pressure than he did on the tense final day of the second Test at Newlands, batting and battling to try and save the match against a powerful and vocal English attack. And yet, it was not pressure that he felt.

“That’s not pressure, that’s privilege. Pressure is playing semi-pro cricket, fighting for your career with nobody watching. To be playing in a Test match at Newlands, the ground full, with Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad running in … Wow! It felt like a video game at one stage. It’s been a tough journey but it has been worth it, and I’ve walked down those stairs on to that field a lot, playing for the Cobras, Western Province and even my club side [Durbanville] here.
“I always just look at the mountain a bit and appreciate the scenery, it’s not like playing in Kimberley where you see nothing. I took a lot for granted when I was younger, I did myself no favours, I did not put in the hard work that was needed. I had limited opportunities and then I didn’t take them. So I thought playing for South Africa would never happen when I was younger,” Malan said.
While the domestic structure seems to have fulfilled it’s filtering role judging by the excellent composure and technique Malan showed in the second Test, he gives a lot of credit for his renaissance to Cobras coach Ashwell Prince.
“Ashwell has been massive for me, he gave me a chance back in franchise cricket. He played 66 Tests and averaged more than 40, so he has lived it and done it as far as cricket is concerned, and you listen to him. He’s a fantastic coach and I love playing for him. He’s especially good when it comes to the cat-and-mouse of you as a batsman improving, but then the bowlers spot something different and move on to targeting you in a different way. Mentally he really pushes you,” Malan said.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.