On sale in Europe since 2018, Peugeot has followed sister brand Opel up on its debut of the Combo Cargo last year by announcing spec and pricing details of the new Partner van.
Emerging as the fourth model to be jointly developed between the PSA Group and Toyota with the other two models being the Citroën Berlingo and the Toyota ProAce, the Partner comes underpinned by the EMP2 platform and will be offered solely in long wheelbase L2 configuration.

In this guise, the Partner boasts an overall length of 4.75 m and wheelbase of 2.16 m, which Peugeot claims translates to a loading capacity of 4.40m3 and a payload of exactly 1 000 kg. Adding to the loadbay is a 12-volt power socket, a so-called pass through bulkhead for longer items and six LED lights with an output of 237 lm. A full-size spare wheel is included underneath the body.
Inside, the Partner sports Peugeot’s latest i-Cockpt design and while offering a number of storage areas jointly rated at 113-litres, doesn’t skimp on equipment with features such as an eight-inch touchscreen infotainment system with Bluetooth, USB, Apple CarPlay, Android Auto and MirrorLink, a Heads-Up Display readout, cruise control, a four-speaker sound system, electric windows, auto on/off headlights and rear parking sensors.

Claimed to provide seating for three thanks to the inclusion of an electronic handbrake, safety in the Partner comes courtesy of ABS, EBD and EBA, six airbags, auto locking doors, tyre pressure monitor and Peugeot’s multi-mode Advanced Grip Control system.
Riding as standard on 16-inch steel wheels, the Partner is motivated by the same 1.6 HDI turbodiesel engine as the Combo Cargo/Combo Life and Opel Crossland X that produces 68kW/230Nm. Hooked to a five-speed manual gearbox, the drivetrain translates to a claimed fuel consumption figure of 5.1 L/100 km with emissions rated at 134 g/km.

Priced at R389 900, the Partner comes as standard with a five year/100 000 km warranty and service plan.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.