Orlando Pirates are enjoying a good run in the Absa Premiership, picking up their fourth straight win in a 1-0 victory over AmaZulu at the Orlando Stadium on Saturday evening, but head coach Josef Zinnbauer was not entirely pleased with the way his charges squandered goal-scoring opportunities.
READ: Zinnbauer open to signing new players at Pirates
The Bucs coach says they will have to work more on killing off their games and utilising their chances, adding that Vincent Pule didn’t have a good start, though he did ultimately fire in the only goal of the game.
“In the first half Pule was not so good, we had two to three chances and when you don’t score it’s always difficult when you are playing a team that is strong in defence. The second half was better after we changed the system a bit,” said the Pirates coach.
“We had a lot of chances and that (missing them) is a problem. We will continue to make it better in the next couple of days. It’s not always the case that you win 1-0 in a game, the opponents might get a corner kick and score a goal while you had a lot of chances and didn’t use them. We don’t want that, we will try to rectify it during the training sessions.”
Even though Pule didn’t have a good start to the game, the winger ended up being the hero on the day.
“It’s been a while since I last scored, I think the last time I scored was against Kaizer Chiefs and I was a bit emotional. When you are a person who loves scoring goals and when things are not going your way you become emotional. I was relieved when I scored that goal,” said Pule.
“We are working hard as a team and we have a good spirit now and have to continue with it. We didn’t play well during the first round, and I think this round we know where we are going.”
The victory against Usuthu saw Pirates jump to fourth place on the log having collected 33 points after 19 games, just one point shy of SuperSport United.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
							
							
							
															Would you like to place a soccer bet? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.