51-year-old Vernon Kruger has been up on his pole for nearly two months, and his spirits are still high as he focuses on his goal to set a new world record, reports Lowvelder.
One of the biggest challenges he has encountered is the ever-changing weather conditions. Dullstroom is known for its misty, cold conditions.
Kruger records his attempt in videos he posts on Facebook, and did one on how the sun disappeared in a few moments leading up to a full-blown thunderstorm.
He had told Lowvelder’s sister publication, Steelburger/Lydenburg News, that one of his greatest concerns was lightning. This fear soon came to a realisation after only a few days in the barrel when the first lightning strike missed the barrel by metres.
To make matters worse, the umbrella covering the barrel, keeping Kruger dry from rain, started to leak. As soon as he fixed one leak, another one would spring.
He has a workout routine every morning, and in the past weeks, some members of the public joined him on the ground, mimicking his movement and routine.
He also made a stew over coals in his barrel and keeps himself busy by making objects out of wood, as well as other crafts.

Many people questioned what his Christmas plans were, but due to personal reasons, Vernon does not celebrate this occasion.
He had the following to say: “Just to avoid embarrassment or misunderstanding, I need to mention that I do not celebrate Christmas, or partake in gift-giving or receiving on Christmas Day. I don’t mean to advertise my life or reveal everything about myself, but when undergoing an event like this, it becomes unavoidable to disclose certain things.”
Recently, Andrew Dollenberg, from the Steve Hamilton Pipe Band, came to play some bagpipe music at the foot of the pole. As far as entertainment around the pole goes, there is no shortage.
People are urged to donate to Vernon’s cause, as all proceeds will be donated to charity.
Kruger is attempting to break his own world record for “longest duration pole sitting in a barrel”.
In 1997, then 29-year-old Kruger spent 67 days in a 500-litre wine barrel mounted onto a pole in the little town of Dullstroom, breaking the Guinness World Record. It has remained unbeaten despite various worldwide attempts.
The pole is 25 metres high (eight floors), and the wine barrel is 1,100 millimetres high, 725 millimetres wide at the top, 870 millimetres wide in the centre, and 500 litres in volume.
Kruger will remain on top of the pole day and night, and will only be allowed to come down once the event is over. He ascended the pole on November 14, 2019.
World record remains unbeaten
In 2003, US illusionist David Blaine sought recognition from the Guinness Book of World Records for his attempt to live in a clear 2x2x1 metre box while dangling over the river Thames in London. But Guinness’s keeper of records Stewart Newport acknowledged that Kruger’s record trumps that of Blaine.
The event created massive headlines in 1997 all over the world. American radio and television personality Howard Stern even phoned Kruger while he was in the barrel – connected with a Telkom landline at the time – to encourage and congratulate him.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.