One can expect Loftus in 2020 to play its fair share of Eric Prydz’ “Call on Me” … because Morne Steyn is back.
The former Springbok flyhalf, at 35, has made a dramatic return to the Bulls for this year’s Super Rugby campaign and will most certainly slot his fair share of kicks at goal, which usually is followed by the 2004 hit.
It’s an indication of his reliability.

However, this season Steyn will also be expected to play more of a mentoring role to the promising Manie Libbok and Chris Smith, much like Schalk Brits did last year.
Here’s what he had to say.
Why he chose to leave France (Stade Francais) to return to the Bulls…
I actually had an opportunity to stay in France, but it wasn’t necessarily the best one. There were also a few opportunities from other unions as well. However, at the last moment, I asked my agent to take a chance and make an enquiry at the Bulls. Luckily it came through. It feels perfect. I started my career here and now I end it here too. It’s perfect. I’m back home.
Steyn left for France with 45 Test caps already behind his name. What he learnt as an already experienced player in France…
I played some fullback there, but that was more a case of there being no-one else. It’s been six years and it was a great experience. I think the weather over there changed your game a little bit. There were definitely things to work on. I became more tactically aware.
On his mentoring role…
I really want to help the younger guys a bit, to make sure my experience filters through in a manner of speaking. A lot of young guys just want run with the ball and enjoy themselves. They don’t always think a lot about tactical kicking and game management. Hopefully I can assist in running the tactics and see what difference I can make. 
Steyn isn’t here to sit on the bench…
I don’t think any player joins a team with the expectation of being a substitute and wearing the No 22 jersey. Manie’s performed well and he’s exciting. It’s nice to have competition. Not one of us want to become complacent. We want to push each other to keep working hard. But hopefully I can make the No 10 jersey my own. 
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.