Given that they’re currently, by far, South Africa’s best bet to advance deep into this year’s Super Rugby playoffs, the last thing the Stormers needed before the season was more administrative upheaval.
The franchise’s embattled professional arm, WP Rugby, on Monday confirmed the exit of chief executive, Paul Zacks.
Yet Stormers head coach, John Dobson, insists the side is “in a really good space” and have actively tried to separate themselves from the boardroom squabbles, which has dogged the franchise for almost four years – predominantly because of huge financial issues.
“We’ve told ourselves we’re independent of that,” said Dobson.
“We’ve built this squad well. There wasn’t one player that we wanted and didn’t get or keep. We were limited to 45 contracts, but we have every player we wanted.
“We’re in a really good operating space at the moment. I feel like we’re backed and empowered. It has no impact.”
Zacks, who rather embarrassingly had to backtrack and commit his future to the franchise at the end of 2018 after an outcry about him applying for the Bulls’ job, has been under intense pressure recently.
A Section 417 report – brought by former commercial partner Aerios – into the liquidation of the union’s professional arm in 2016 found “a number of adverse findings” against Zacks, the most serious being that he allegedly lied under oath.
Presiding Judge Bertelsmann stated that Zacks’ testimony was “obviously untrue”.
He’s also had to fend off a coup from the amateur arm, under the leadership of president Zelt Marais, which wants to take over the affairs of the business end.
Western Province Rugby Group CEO Paul Zacks during the DHL Stormers Press Conference at DHL Newlands Boardroom on December 14, 2018 in Cape Town, South Africa. (Photo by Ashley Vlotman/Gallo Images)
However, Dobson made a point of highlighting that his CEO had done a decent job in helping keep most of the Stormers’ Springboks, which includes Siya Kolisi, Pieter-Steph du Toit, Steven Kitshoff, Frans Malherbe and Bongi Mbonambi – on home soil.
“I think Paul did a good job in helping us assemble the squad and I’m sorry for him that he won’t be here to see any rewards we might reap,” Dobson said.
“2019 was a tricky year off the field, as we all know, and to sit here in what is an improved physical environment with improved operating systems, great energy and freedom of movement … we’re not feeling any interference or anything.”
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.