While there’s consensus that South African rugby is in far more decent shape – at least confidence-wise – following the Springboks’ World Cup victory, economic realities mean that the local game is still struggling to cultivate proper depth due to the continued overseas exodus.
Some positions, particularly at prop, loose forward and wing, are well-stocked, but others aren’t.
But it’s at hooker – the Boks once had to keep a player of Adriaan Strauss’ calibre out because of Bismarck du Plessis’ presence – where the Super Rugby franchises are on wobbly ground.
It’s not a great picture.
Here’s how the depth looks at each franchise in 2020.
BULLS
Louis ‘Chucky’ van der Westhuizen of Namibia poses for a portrait during the Namibia Rugby World Cup 2019 squad photo call on September 14, 2019 in Shirahama, Wakayama, Japan. (Photo by Harry How – World Rugby/World Rugby via Getty Images)
First-choice: Jaco Visagie
Understudies: Johan Grobbelaar, Corniel Els, Chucky van der Westhuizen
The men from Loftus have an interesting dynamic when it comes to the No 2 jersey.
In former Junior Bok Johan Grobbelaar, they have a pocket dynamo with the same type of X-factor qualities as the recently retired Schalk Brits.
However, and understandably, the 22-year-old still has to convince that he can combine that with solid fundamentals – scrumming and throw-ins – like Brits did.
As a result, coach Pote Human will have to shed his preference for more unspectacular exponents like Jaco Visagie and Corniel Els.
Namibian international Louis ‘Chucky’ van der Westhuizen could add proper depth.
Verdict: Not bad, but Human should back his more dynamic options before resorting to his more steady players.
SHARKS
Fez Mbatha of the Cell C Sharks during the Cell C Sharks training session at Jonnson Kings Park on January 30, 2019 in in Durban, South Africa. (Photo by Steve Haag/Gallo Images)
First-choice: Kerron van Vuuren
Understudies: Fez Mbatha, Dylan Richardson, Craig Burden
Last year, Springbok forwards coach Matt Proudfoot mentioned the work-rate of Kerron van Vuuren and he’s certainly not sucking out of his thumb.
The 24-year-old has established himself as a tackling machine, consistently putting in immense defensive shifts and proving solid at the set-pieces.
But the overall feeling is that a full Super Rugby campaign will provide a more accurate reflection of his potential.
Junior Bok Fez Mbatha was highly spoken of by former head coach Robert du Preez yet given limited opportunities, while the exciting Dylan Richardson is inexperienced.
Craig Burden, in contrast, has years of wisdom, but is injury prone.
Verdict: If Burden isn’t around, the Sharks have a raw and somewhat unproven look.
LIONS
Pieter Jansen of Golden Lions during the Currie Cup, Final match between Toyota Free State XV and Xerox Golden Lions XV at Toyota Stadium on September 07, 2019 in Bloemfontein, South Africa. (Photo by Frikkie Kapp/Gallo Images)
First-choice: Pieter Jansen
Understudy: Jan-Henning Campher
A lack of true succession planning has come back to haunt the Lions.
Malcolm Marx is still on the books, but only returns in May after a sabbatical in Japan and in his absence, the Lions currently have no experienced candidates to fill that void.
Pieter Jansen had his moments in the Currie Cup campaign and should be afforded an opportunity to test his mettle at this level, but should his form slump or injury strike, they have problems.
Jan-Henning Campher was recruited last year from the Bulls and hasn’t inspired much confidence yet.
Pumas man Marko Janse van Rensburg is training with the squad and his pedigree is similarly low.
Verdict: Highly troublesome.
STORMERS
Hyron Andrews of the Cell C Sharks tackling Scarra Ntubeni of the DHL Stormers during the Super Rugby match between Cell C Sharks and DHL Stormers at Jonsson Kings Park on March 02, 2019 in Durban, South Africa. (Photo by Steve Haag/Gallo Images)
First-choice: Bongi Mbonambi
Understudies: Scarra Ntubeni, Chad Solomon, Ramone Samuels
Much like the rest of their squad, the Stormers boast the most proven group of hookers in the country.
Bongi Mbonambi’s Springbok journey renders him the best No 2 in the country and has another national deputy to compete with in Scarra Ntubeni.
If those two men stay fit, the Stormers would – given the context – boast enviable depth.
But the franchise has never been known for its clean injury record … and that will create problems.
Verdict: The best depth in the country … conditionally.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.