England pace bowler James Anderson will miss the final two Tests in South Africa after suffering a rib injury during their dramatic victory in Cape Town.
Anderson sustained the problem on the final day of the second Test and MRI scans on Wednesday confirmed he won’t be back in action until after the current tour.
It is a bitter blow for the 37-year-old, who was just two games into his comeback following the calf injury he endured in last summer’s Ashes series.
Anderson, England’s record Test wicket taker, spent almost five months working back to full fitness and showed signs of being back to his best with seven wickets in England’s series-levelling 189-run win.
But he was in visible discomfort on the final day, clutching his side at times and grimacing through two painful overs after tea.
“James Anderson has been ruled out of the remainder of the Test series against South Africa after sustaining a left rib injury in England’s second Test victory at Newlands,” an ECB statement said.
“Anderson felt tightness and discomfort at the end of the morning session on day five and was only able to bowl eight overs during the day. He will return to the UK in the next few days.”
Anderson tweeted: “Frustrating to be missing the rest of this series with a broken rib but hopefully will be healed in a few weeks! Will be supporting the boys from home.”
Meanwhile, Ben Stokes made an emphatic case for the unique drama of five-day Test cricket this week — inspiring England to a series-levelling win against South Africa in the final overs of a dramatic contest.
His match-winning performance in Cape Town on Tuesday came at a time of intensifying debate over the future of the longest form of the game, which has been played since 1877.
The International Cricket Council (ICC) will in the coming months discuss reducing Tests to four days as part of structuring the global calendar beyond 2023.
“It’s why five-day cricket should always be around. It’s the best form of the game,” said Stokes, England’s man of the match.
Root’s opposite number, Faf du Plessis, also said he did not support a move towards four-day Test matches, despite a statement by Cricket South Africa that it was official policy to back a reduced format.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.