A 17-year-old suspect accused of rape and murder reportedly bragged in a video posted on social media that he would be released from jail and cause havoc.
The 17-year-old was arrested in Seshego, Limpopo, on Sunday, January 5, following a manhunt by the police who sought the suspect for the “brutal” stabbing of an 18-year-old matric pupil who has since died.
Limpopo police spokesperson Brigadier Motlafela Mojapelo said the 17-year-old appeared in the Seshego Magistrate’s Court on Tuesday for the alleged murder and was remanded in custody until January 30.
He said that the suspect, who was a school dropout, was scheduled to appear in Seshego magistrate court on February 27 for the accusation of rape.
SowetanLive reports that the video in which the 17-year-old bragged that he would get out of jail and cause havoc surfaced on social media on Wednesday.
The 17-year-old, it was reported, is seen in the video while in a prison cell and in the video he reportedly said he was “untouchable”.
The publication reported that two videos were posted on Facebook and that in one he was heard saying he had been arrested for the second time and that life in jail “is tough” but that he was “going to be fine” and that he would be out of jail and “I will show you sh*t”.
“I’m back again, this is my bed, I’m feeling comfortable and we do things other people fail to do here. Do you know this place? This is my home,” the 17-year-old reportedly said in the second video clip.
The publication reported that Mojapelo said the video was not recorded in police cells but at a centre where the 17-year-old was imprisoned.
Mojapelo told the publication that police did not allow inmates to enter into cells with cellphones.
It was reported that the spokesperson of the Limpopo department of social development, Witness Tiva, also denied that the video was recorded at the Polokwane Secure Care Centre.
“The video started circulating on January 5, before the minor was brought into our custody. He was brought to us on January 7,” Tiva was quoted as saying.
Tiva pointed out to the publication that in the video the 17-year-old was not in the uniform the centre provided to those in their care but rather in casual clothes.
The murder victim has been identified as Thoriso Noko Kgomo from Luthuli Park, Seshego. He was a Grade 12 learner at Northern Academy School in Polokwane
Kgomo was on January 2 at about 2 am allegedly attacked and brutally stabbed by the suspect at Zone 3 Seshego.
ALSO READ: Limpopo matriculant killed days before results released, 17-year-old suspect in court


For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.