There might be a lot of feature-race action go- ing on in Cape Town but tomorrow’s Listed Swallow Stakes over 1160m on the Turffontein Standside track has been widely supported by many of the top trainers.
The best-handicapped runner is Sarah from the Paul Peter yard and she has to be in with a massive chance, especially with jockey Warren Kennedy up.
Kennedy is deep in the red with bookmakers to win this season’s championship title and there is still more than six months of the season to run.
In his chase for the title he wisely has avoided the attention given by many jockeys to the proceedings at Kenilworth and has opted to take up a number of decent rides on the Highveld instead.
Sarah is very speedy and while she has won over 1200m, that was early in her career when she was not facing the strongest opposition.
However, against a higher level of runner, she might be found wanting in the closing stages, as she was when a 3.25-length third behind True To Life in the Grade 3 Magnolia Stakes over this course and distance in November.
Mike de Kock has three runners and it is interesting to note Gin Fizz, who was a little one-paced in the closing stages at this course in last week’s Grade 3 Three Troikas Stakes over 1400m. The drop to 1160m will be right up her street and she is selected to beat her rivals home.
With Gavin Lerena in the Cape, apprentice Denis Schwarz has picked up the ride and he thrives on situations like this. This daughter of So Falling Rain is not always the easiest of fillies to control but she undoubtedly is very talented when in the mood. Another interesting De Kock entry is Tallinn.
She went into the Graham Beck Stakes unbeaten in three starts but suffered bad interference caused by a loose horse and trailed in near the rear of the field.
She then ran unplaced in the Grade 3 Fillies Mile to finish 4.50 lengths behind Summer Pudding.
She has won over 1200m earlier in her career and with Randall Simons up she could have a say in the finish.
Sean Tarry saddles Tropic Sun who has only raced three times, winning on debut and then run- ning two consecutive seconds. Her last run was over this course and distance and she had to overcome a slow start before moving to the front at the 400m mark.
Unfortunately, she was run out of it in the closing stages and was beaten 1.75 lengths by All At Once. She will get better as she gets stronger but even based on recent form, she should finish in the money. Luke Ferraris takes the ride.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
							
							
							
															Would you like to place a bet on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.