Ahead of the Proteas facing off against England in a New Year’s Test at Newlands on Friday, Minister of Transport Fikile Mbalula expressed the view that the employment of former Proteas by the team was a setback for racial transformation.
“What are you guys doing to transformation? You [are] taking us back,” he tweeted in response to the official Twitter account for Cricket South Africa (CSA) posting picture on Thursday morning ahead of the test, which included a picture of former Proteas Mark Boucher, Jacques Kallis, and Charl Langeveldt alongside a caption saying that those who see the pic would be forgiven for thinking it was a “throw-back Thursday” post, in reference to a trend which sees Twitter users posting pictures from the past.
All three former Proteas are currently employed by the team. Boucher is the new Proteas coach, Langeveldt – who has been a longtime Proteas coach in various capacities  – is a bowling coach and Kallis is a batting consultant.
Mbalula’s tweets divided Twitter, with some saying he was right that the picture shows that SA cricket is an “old boys’ club” and others welcoming the inclusion of the three former Proteas in the team’s staff.
READ MORE: Three reasons why the England series could be make-or-break for the Proteas
While Mbalula’s tweet suggests he believes all three former Proteas are white, Langeveldt is actually a coloured South African.
The Test will take place at a difficult time for South African cricket, with the Western Province Cricket Association (WPCA) having been placed under administration less than two weeks ago.
News24 has reported that the reason for the organisation being placed under administration, with its entire board also having been suspended, is the approval of a R750-million development to its northern precinct, which has caused financial difficulties.
The Proteas head into the New Year’s Test one-up in the series after a 107-run win against England at Supersport Park.
The test will include the national debut of experienced opening batsman Pieter Malan, due to an injury which has excluded Aiden Markram from the series.


For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.