A Grade 8 boy of Parktown Boys’ High School attending an orientation camp at a lodge near Brits in North West has been missing since Thursday morning following a water activity.
The school issued a statement on Friday morning stating that the Grade 8 group arrived at camp on Wednesday.
“On Thursday morning, it was realised that a boy had gone missing from the camp. Emergency procedures have been instituted by camp management and are being assisted by members of the local community and the SAPS Emergency Services,” the statement read.
Image: Parktown Boys Facebook page
“Police search-and-rescue are on site and are already at work in the area of the river where a water activity was held after the boy’s arrival. The parents of the missing boy are at the venue.”
The school said the search was continuing.
“Our thoughts and prayers are with the family during this traumatic time.”
Gauteng education MEC Panyaza Lesufi tweeted: “I am sadly informed that during the Parktown Boys Grade 8 Orientation Camp in Mpumalanga (sic), one learner couldn’t be accounted for after a water activity. Police search-and-rescue are on site in the area of the river where a water activity was held. I will also join the search.”
Lesufi later added: “Rescue teams suspended the search last night. They will resume with the search [on Friday] morning. Jointly with the school we’ve agreed to cancel the camp. The boys will have their breakfast [on Friday] morning and thereafter be taken back home. We remain hopeful.”

UPDATE 2: #ParktownBoysCamp . I met with the family of the missing child on site and they granted us permission to release his photo. The rescue team has resumed their search. The boys will arrive back at school around 11am. All sporting activities are suspended. pic.twitter.com/DoRi1vxaFA
— Panyaza Lesufi (@Lesufi) January 17, 2020


UPDATE #ParktownBoysCampRescue teams suspended the search last night. They will resume with the search this morning. Jointly with the school we’ve agreed to cancel the camp. The boys will have their breakfast this morning and thereafter be taken back home. We remain hopeful ???????? https://t.co/AHuCYogfTO
— Panyaza Lesufi (@Lesufi) January 17, 2020

A missing person’s report has been filed and anyone with information is urged to contact Detective Constable Netshiunda Assen on 079 607 6844 or 012 252 8520.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.