DA Gauteng leader John Moodey has lambasted fellow members of the party who “have attempted to underplay the seriousness of [apartheid president FW] de Klerk’s statement and its repercussions”.
De Klerk came under fire when, during an interview held to commemorate 30 years since the release of Nelson Mandela and the unbanning of liberation movements, he said apartheid was not a crime against humanity.
The statement sparked debate in the country.
In a statement on Monday, Moodey said some people failed to understand the legacy apartheid left and how it affected human dignity.
“Furthermore, they are ignorant of the legacy we have inherited as a result of this evil system. Any way forward to achieve our goal to build our nation, must be dealt with by challenging this view head-on.”
More specifically, he added, there are members in the DA who have brought into question what the party stands for by downplaying De Klerk’s statement.
“There are those in the DA, who through social media have attempted to underplay the seriousness of De Klerk’s statement and its repercussions.
“By so doing they have rekindled the whole question of what the DA stands for. It has the potential to drive a wedge in the party.
“I distance myself from such divisive sentiments,” Moodey said.
Speaking to News24, Moodey declined to say who he was referring to but said they were being “conveniently ignorant”.
On Twitter, however, DA member Ghaleb Cachalia and others attempted to weigh in on the matter.

Big words like Genocide, Nazi, Fascist, Anti-Semite and Crimes against Humanity must be used accurately lest they lose their meaning. Apartheid was a pernicious system of social engineering, discrimination and repression.I too indulged in the hyperbole of youth.I now know better.
— ghaleb cachalia. MP (@GhalebCachalia) February 15, 2020

In his statement, Moodey maintained that apartheid was a crime against humanity and said to deny this was “insulting”.
“The statement by former president FW de Klerk denying that apartheid was a crime against humanity is not only disgraceful, but an insult to all those who, like myself, had first-hand experience of the suffering and humiliation of living under apartheid and more importantly, to our national programme as South Africans of reconciliation and redress.”
While he did not agree with the manner in which the EFF dealt with De Klerk’s presence at state of the nation address last Thursday, he believed that the former president “should have some very serious introspection, make the necessary retraction and the appropriate apology”.
The FW de Klerk has since withdrawn its statement and apologised.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.