As of Monday last week, Mandisa Mashego is reportedly no longer the leader of the Economic Freedom Fighters’ (EFF) Gauteng caucus in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature (GPL), nor is she a member of the legislature.
This after supposedly handing in her two-page resignation letter to the party’s leader Julius Malema and its secretary-general Marshall Dlamini.
Sunday World reports that her decision came after weeks of internal drama following a tweet sent by Malema to former Joburg mayor Herman Mashaba hinting that there were disloyal party leaders within his ranks.
“I’m told one or two of my provincial chairpersons; one from the inland province, and one from the coastal province are also speaking to you. Please speed up the process,” tweeted Malema.

I'm told one or two of my provincial chairpersons; one from the inland province, and one from the coastal province are also speaking to you. Please speed up the process.
— Julius Sello Malema (@Julius_S_Malema) February 1, 2020

It is believed that Mashego took exception to this allegation and assumed that it was in reference to herself and EFF KZN leader Vusi Khoza as they are the only two leaders within the party who did not support Malema’s #matorokisi slate from the party’s last elective conference.
According to the report her decision is also believed to have been a long time coming as it is said that she reportedly removed her personal belongings from her office at the GPL weeks ago.
Two sources confirmed this news to the publication and added that they believe that she will resign from the party altogether in the near future.
The number Mashego used during her official duties is unreachable and she reportedly chose not to comment when contacted by Sunday World.
EFF national spokesperson Vuyani Pambo told the publication that they party had not yet received her resignation.
The Citizen’s request for comment from the EFF comms on the matter had not been responded to at the time of publishing.
Meanwhile, social media was abuzz with news of Mashego’s resignation on Sunday.

We r waiting for Commissar @vuyanipambo to clarify, we don't take what papers are saying
— Moniwa ???????? (@mashiyanef) February 23, 2020


If the resignation story is true then the EFF has lost a great leader in sis Mandisa Mashego
I,for one.. Genuinely like her so much  pic.twitter.com/2PwQTQw8Ov
— lorraine Lolo (@dee_neolauraine) February 23, 2020


True…sad part is Mandisa Mashego will vanish into obscurity, she gives the impression that, she was only after position..a toxic trait, which can destroy a growinh movement..I say good riddance
— BlackRoyale' (@KLouw15) February 23, 2020


I'm not okay????????????, I really loved @MandisaMashego energy and her political wisdom is second to none. I wish her all the best and whichever political party she is headed to, they will be very lucky to have her. All the best sis wam#Mandisa
— Thandisile Tunyiswa (@tara_tunyiswa) February 23, 2020


Julius Malema mocked Mandisa Mashego for exercising her democratic right to contest SG position ????
— 2Jays (@2Jays5) February 23, 2020


media is trying it best to divide the party am sure if she indeed resigned the party will issue a statement proving her resignation so far let's wait for them and stop being "spoon fed" by media with lies????????????????
— BONGANI SBONAKALISO (@waxxyboy) February 23, 2020


Mandisa Mashego must join the ANC it's important we must make the #ANC strong again.
— WE STAND WITH ZUMA???????????? (@Mashiane_Choene) February 23, 2020


There reason why Mandisa Mashego is leaving EFF. She accepted an SG nomination by Naledi Chirwa in Dec in defiance of tyranny and bully Julius Malema. Malema was very angry is not surprising that she quit EFF.pic.twitter.com/Sz0HDyPt3A
— 2Jays (@2Jays5) February 23, 2020

READ NEXT: Apologies are patronising and encourage racism, says Mashego during Catzavelos’ sentencing
(Compiled by Kaunda Selisho)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.