Reported in November last year as being mulled for a possible return in two years’ time, Volkswagen has instead sprung a surprise by reviving the R moniker as the new flagship version of the Touareg range.
Returning after a hiatus of twelve years, the R also signals a departure for Wolfsburg’s performance moniker by being resplendent on a plug-in hybrid model for the first time, with the 5.0 TDI V10 engine from the Touareg R50 TDI making way for a 3.0 TSI V6 that produces the same 250 kW as the Porsche Cayenne S E-Hybrid, but with the inclusion of a 14.1 kWh lithium-ion battery pack that adds an additional 100 kW.
With a combined system output of 340kW/700Nm and an all-electric range of 45 km/h at speeds up to 140 km/h, the R will reach a limited top speed of 250 km/h with the amount of twist being transmitted to all four wheels via an eight-speed Tiptronic gearbox.

While no 0-100 km/h acceleration figure were revealed, the R boasts a Torsen centre differential lock that can send as much as 80% of the mentioned power to the rear wheels, with four driving modes being offered; Eco, Normal, Comfort and Sport, along with a dedicated E-Mode for all electric driving plus a Hybrid setting. An off-road package is optional and comes with two further modes; Gravel and Sand, while also adding a front skidplate.
Aesthetically, the R’s differences from its siblings includes not only the R bodykit, but also a black grille, body coloured extended wheel arches, black detailing on the air intakes, around the doors and bumpers, black mirror caps and 20-inch black or matt grey Braga alloy wheels with a burnished finish on the inside. Optional though are 21-inch black or burnished Suzuka alloys, the Lapiz Blue Metallic paint finish derived from the Golf R and T-Roc R as well as 22-inch black/burnished Estoril alloy wheels.
Keeping standard Touareg interior fixtures such as the Innovision Cockpit, quad-zone climate control, Matrix LED headlights and tilt/sliding panoramic sunroof, the R’s bespoke additions consists of Silver Wave aluminium inserts, Vienna leather seats with R branded headrests, a  new R-badged heated, leather-wrapped multi-function steering wheel, high gloss black and silver look centre console detailing, Crystal Grey stitching on the seats, floor mats, doors, gear lever and armrest, stainless steel sill protectors and R branded illuminated door sills.

From the options list, buyers can have a 780-watt Dynaudio sound system, diamond-shaped stitching on the seats and doors, Puglia natural leather with Sepang Blue piping and a suite of safety and drive assistance systems such as Night Vision, Front Cross Traffic Alert and Travel Assist adaptive cruise control that allows for partial semi-autonomous driving.
Debuting at the Geneva Motor Show next month, the Touareg R will go on sale in Europe from the second half of this year with South African availability still to be confirmed.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.