Add Fassi to the Sharks’ seemingly endless supply of Springbok-class backs The Sharks took their time in dismantling the Highlanders in Dunedin, but when they struck it was with the sweetest precision and ruthlessness. There was a distinct All Blacks flavour to the way they capitalised on turnover ball, with Aphelele Fassi surely throwing himself into the Springbok fullback mix with the way he combined so superbly with his wings. ALSO READ: Super Sharks channel their inner Bok to humble Highlanders The only negative for the Sharks on one of their best days overseas was the string of penalties they...Add Fassi to the Sharks’ seemingly endless supply of Springbok-class backs
The Sharks took their time in dismantling the Highlanders in Dunedin, but when they struck it was with the sweetest precision and ruthlessness.
There was a distinct All Blacks flavour to the way they capitalised on turnover ball, with Aphelele Fassi surely throwing himself into the Springbok fullback mix with the way he combined so superbly with his wings.
ALSO READ: Super Sharks channel their inner Bok to humble Highlanders
The only negative for the Sharks on one of their best days overseas was the string of penalties they conceded in the second half which briefly threatened to let the Highlanders back in the game. – Ken Borland
Have the Lions lost one of their key weapons?
Morne van der Berg of the Lions, Jaco Peyper (R) during the Super Rugby match between Emirates Lions and Reds at Emirates Airline Park on February 08, 2020 in Johannesburg, South Africa. (Photo by Wessel Oosthuizen/Gallo Images)
Has one of the Lions’ traditional weapons – the scrum – become their weakness?
Despite securing their first Super Rugby win of the season over the Reds at Ellis Park, their woes at scrum-time has been a big talking point.
Veteran former Springbok prop Jannie du Plessis took a beating from Reds prop and former Capetonian JP Smith and in the first half already the Lions conceded three scrum penalties.
ALSO READ: Green stars in wasteful Lions win
In the second half Du Plessis and loosehead Dylan Smith were replaced by Sti Sithole and Carlu Sadie and there was a significant improvement.
Lions scrum coach and former Bok prop Julian Redelinghuys has his work cut out for him with a vaunted Stormers back lying in wait. – Rudolph Jacobs
Pitiful Bulls attack wouldn’t make it past a wheel of feta
Cornal Hendricks of the Bulls tacked by Herschel Jantjies of the Stormers and Jamie Roberts of the Stormers during the Super Rugby match between DHL Stormers and Vodacom Bulls at DHL Newlands on February 08, 2020 in Cape Town, South Africa. (Photo by Ashley Vlotman/Gallo Images)
While an excellent set-piece display by the Bulls should rightly be feted, all that quality ball still resulted in exactly zero points being scored by the visitors.
Some of the Bulls’ attacking efforts were so hapless though that not even a defence with the composition of feta cheese would have been challenged.
ALSO READ: Stormers shut out Bulls in yet another dreary derby
Unfortunately for the Bulls, the Stormers defence was as solid as a block of Pecorino Romano.
The Bulls were certainly more threatening when Morne Steyn took the ball flatter at flyhalf and they need to find a way to bring fullback Warrick Gelant into play more often.
The serious ankle injury suffered by outside centre Dylan Sage, the Springbok Sevens star, has also reduced their attacking options. – KB
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.