He is understood to have died from complications related to the illness.
Those who worked with him have paid tribute to his work ethic and great sense of humour.
eMedia Investments said in a statement it was saddened by loss of its camera operator, who worked at eNCA at the company’s Cape Town office.
He was tested and admitted to intensive care. Tom’s test results confirmed that he had Covid-19, and he passed away in hospital on Wednesday morning, they said.
eMedia chief operating officer Antonio Lee said Tom joined eNCA in December 2013 as an ENG camera operator. Before that, he had worked at CNBC Africa.
“Lungile was known for his larger-than-life personality and his dedication to his craft. His buoyant laughter will be sorely missed. Our thoughts are with his wife, Nandipha, and his children,” Lee said.
“In adherence to government regulations, we have disinfected and closed the affected floor,” Lee said, and they had instituted a tracing and tracking process.
Employees who had contact with Tom were advised to stay at home. They would be tested and go into self-isolation.
The company was making plans to honour his memory.
Many journalists have found themselves at the coalface of reporting on the pandemic, with the media industry designated an essential service since the start of lockdown.
In a statement, the ANC in Parliament said it had learnt with shock and sadness of the passing of the “top cameraman”.
“Mr Tom was an established cameraman who contributed immensely in the broadcasting industry to bring news to the people of South Africa. It is with great sadness that the coronavirus pandemic has robbed the media industry of one of its most dedicated camera operators.
“Lungile was passionate and dedicated to his work. We would often see him with his colleagues in and around the parliamentary precinct capturing and timeously reporting the work of parliament,” said ANC chief whip Pemmy Majodina. “He will always be remembered for his work ethic and friendly personality.”
Issued by the Office of the Chief whip, Hon. Pemmy Majodina

Rest easy bhuti! I’ve worked with you a number of times! You were always a pleasure! Rest bhuti! Rest Lungile Tom. eNCA/eTv hasn’t lost a cameraperson but a brother and friend to many????! #covid19mustfall #Level3 #CommittedToBetter #LockdownSA #level3lockdown pic.twitter.com/F7SjnNEHpf
— Joy Nonzukiso Peter (@AfricaourLand) May 13, 2020


OMG, what devastating news. Condolences to his friends, family, colleagues at ENCA and the media fraternity. https://t.co/YXqvEyNWOR
— Phumzile Van Damme (@zilevandamme) May 13, 2020

For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.