The Gauteng department of health announced on Wednesday that a total number of 47 people were currently hospitalised in the public and private facilities due to the Covid-19.
The department said the total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in the province stood at 2,014 with 1,428 recoveries and 22 deaths.
“7,872 of a total of 9,673 contacts traced people had completed the 14 days monitoring period with no symptoms reported and therefore they are de-isolated after they were in contact with people who tested positive for Covid-19,” the department said in an statement.

Gauteng Premier David Makhura said the executive council will this morning visit various shopping centres across the province
“As the executive council, we will this morning visit various shopping centres across the province to assess compliance of shop-owners and shoppers with the lockdown Level 4 regulations. MEC Bandile Masuku and I will start at Soshanguve Crossing Mall then move to Ivory Park Mall,” he said on Twitter.

As the Executive Council we will this morning visit various shopping centres across the province to assess compliance of shop-owners and shoppers with the lockdown Level 4 regulations. MEC @bandilemasuku and I will start at Soshanguve Crossing Mall then move to Ivory Park Mall.
— David Makhura (@David_Makhura) May 13, 2020

Makhura and Masuku were also accompanied by environmental health inspectors to assess the pricing of food items and maintenance of food security standards at Shoprite at the mall.

#COVID19 | WATCH: Premier @David_Makhura, together with environmental health inspectors assess pricing of food items and maintenance of food security standards at Shoprite. #GAUTENGCOVID19 pic.twitter.com/wFBrl224R0
— GautengGov (@GautengProvince) May 13, 2020

Meanwhile, Gauteng MEC for cooperative governance and traditional affairs Lebogang Maile visited Alex Mall located in Sandton as the compliance assessments continued.

MEC @LebogangMaile1 assessing prices of food items and maintenance of food security standards. He also did a walk-about at the #COVIDー19 screening marquees #day48oflockdown #COVIDー19 pic.twitter.com/WU7gH7BNPN
— GP_HumanSettlements (@GP_DHS) May 13, 2020

(Compiled by Molefe Seeletsa)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.