Sickos are still around. Sorry, probably not the ideal subject to inflict on you while imprisoned but then again, you might find some time after the chores and exercise to think on these things and find solutions. Whenever I hear of a murder or rape, my mind immediately centres on the victims. The lives of parents, spouses, children are left with indelible pain and suffering. A horror and heart-wrenching life changer. But here’s the thing. Emphasis is mainly placed on the perpetrators. Court cases are all about them and how their money-grabbing attorneys are going to have them found not...Sickos are still around.
Sorry, probably not the ideal subject to inflict on you while imprisoned but then again, you might find some time after the chores and exercise to think on these things and find solutions.
Whenever I hear of a murder or rape, my mind immediately centres on the victims. The lives of parents, spouses, children are left with indelible pain and suffering.
A horror and heart-wrenching life changer.
But here’s the thing. Emphasis is mainly placed on the perpetrators. Court cases are all about them and how their money-grabbing attorneys are going to have them found not guilty.
Courtrooms are filled with gawkers, only there to witness the drama, blood and guts and treating the life destroyers as heroes.
Here, I must admit, the media are not blameless in playing up the bad parts.
But nothing about the heartache experienced by the victims’ families as they, day after day, have to listen to the gory details of how their loved ones (even babies) were maimed and killed. And the worst is to come. The sentence. The perps live on, given another lease on life.
Often they’re out on parole, having been rehabilitated (sic).
But what of the victim’s families? A life has been taken away, while the guilty parties are happy ever after.
So, here’s the question. How must the guilty be treated? What would satisfy the left-behinds? What would be the best deterrent to discourage the would-be slaughterer?
I believe in “a life for a life”, but this comes with exacting conditions.
Like competent investigators, backed by unbiased judiciary.
Without these two elements, capital punishment would be a travesty (like in the old apartheid days). In an ideal world this would work, but with crooks in high places being left off the hook, it has no chance.
The answer? Let’s exercise our minds while isolated from the mundane.
Who knows, they might come with an effective, sustainable solution. Like stoning.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.