In a move similar to the ES earlier this year, Lexus has now introduced a more affordable hybrid version of the UX 250h in the guise of the EX.
Until now only offered in flagship SE guise, the EX continues aesthetically unchanged from its prices sibling, but misses out on a few niceties such as an electrically adjustable steering column, auto-dimming rear-view mirror, ventilated front seats, memory and auto-dimming function for the mirrors, Auto High Beam Assist, memory function for driver’s seat, the surround view camera system, Lane Keeping Assist and Blind Spot Monitoring.

In addition, the SE’s leather interior makes way for five so-called Nulux synthetic leather options; Black, Cobalt, Ash, B Ocher and Cream, while the adaptive function for the cruise control has been dropped along with the regenerative braking system.
Despite this, the EX still comes as standard with a touchscreen infotainment incorporating not only satellite navigation, but for the first time, Apple CarPlay and Android Auto, a tyre pressure monitor, dual-zone climate control, an eight-speaker sound system, keyless entry, heated and folding electric mirrors, auto-levelling LED headlights, front and rear parking sensors with a panoramic reverse camera and electric heated front seats.
In addition, the spec sheet also includes dual USB ports, rain sense wipers, eight airbags, traction and stability control, a Drive Mode Selector with three settings; Eco, Normal and Sport, the 15 GB on-board Lexus Connect Wi-Fi bundle, Lane Departure Warning, an electric tailgate, Hill Start Assist and daytime running LEDs.

Riding on the same 18-inch alloy wheels as the SE, the EX also comes equipped with the same drivetrain, which pairs a 107kW/180Nm normally aspirated 2.0-litre petrol engine with an electric motor for a total system output of 135 kW. Paired to a CVT with drive going to the front wheels only, the EX will get from 0-100 km/h in 8.5 seconds and top out at 177 km/h. Claimed fuel consumption is rated at 4.5 L/100 km.
Available in a choice of 12 colours; Black, Amber, White Quartz, Sonic Titanium, Platinum Silver, Graphite Black, Sonic Quartz, Blazing Carnelian, Mercury Grey, Terrane Khaki, Madder Red  and Celestial Blue, the UX 250h EX, like its siblings, comes standard with a seven year/105 000 km warranty and maintenance plan.
PRICING
UX 200 EX – R654 700
UX 250h EX – R690 300
UX 250h SE – R756 200
UX 200 F Sport – R785 400
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.