BMW has reportedly confirmed that its controversially styled all-new 4 Series will officially be unveiled on 2 June as part of an online reveal.
The subject of much criticism for the oversized kidney grilles that bowed on the Concept 4 in Frankfurt last year, the internally designated G22 briefly appeared in a teaser video on Tuesday evening (26 May), but which was quickly removed soon after, igniting speculation that it might have been unblocked or posted by accident.
Having copped even more flak after leaking on social media back in February, the new Four, which has already made the rounds on various online platforms wearing heavy to moderate and then minor layers of camouflage while undergoing testing, will once again be offered as a coupe, cabriolet and four-door Gran Coupe with its underpinnings being the same CLAR as the 3, 5 and 7 Series.
In spite of the mentioned clip being pulled, the germancarforum.com has managed to obtain not only a screengrab but also the video’s link which at the time of writing, was still active and showing a still image of the newcomer throughout the supposed presentation’s five min 57 sec running time.
Aside from the grille, the interior has also been pictured with the image posted by carscoops.com bearing few differences from the 3 Series in design and look. The same will also be true of the engines offered in that the Four will come with the same assortment of four-and-six-cylinder turbocharged petrol and diesel engines.
Still to be confirmed is whether a plug-in hybrid drivetrain would feature, although very much a deadest is the M4 that will debut next year powered by the new S58 3.0-litre turbocharged straight-six producing 353 kW and 375 kW in the case of the Competition model.
Shared with the M3, torque is rated at 600 Nm regardless of the output, but while its sibling is slated to offer a six-speed manual gearbox and rear-wheel-drive, the M4 could sport the eight-speed Steptronic ‘box only with drive going to all four wheels. It is however worth mentioning that this remains unconfirmed.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.