A 39-year-old man appeared in the Klerksdorp Magistrate’s Court on Monday for housebreaking with the intent to commit an unknown crime.
He was arrested after allegedly being caught by the homeowner trying to enter the house through window in Alabama, outside Klerksdorp, in the early hours of Saturday morning.
It is alleged that the homeowner went to bed at about 10pm on Friday only to be woken up by a “strange” noise and went to investigate, said the SAPS in a statement.
In a video that has been circulating on social media, the man can be seen attempting to free himself from the window while screaming for help.
The police were called and arrested the suspect.
He has been remanded in custody until his next court appearance on 15 May for a formal bail application.
Watch the video below:

BURGLAR BROKE INTO HOUSE & GOT STUCK IN THE WINDOW HE BROKE IN THROUGH : ALABAMA. KLERKSDORP. NW. NOW THATS WHAT U CALL LOCKDOWN???? pic.twitter.com/luAvT2pe2Z
— REZA (@crimeairnetwork) May 10, 2020

In another unrelated incident, police in Leeudoringstad, North West, arrested four suspects for housebreaking and theft as well as possession of an unlicensed firearm.
This after the community informed the police about a suspicious vehicle driving around in Kgakala Section on Wednesday, 06 May.
“The vehicle was subsequently spotted and pulled over by the police. During the search, the police found properties stolen earlier on the same day at a farm.
“Furthermore, they found a 9mm pistol. Further investigation revealed that the pistol was stolen in Piet Retief, Mpumalanga, during a business robbery in which one suspect was arrested while the others fled the scene.”
They appeared in the Wolmaransstad Magistrate’s Court on Friday and were denied bail.
They have been remanded in custody until their next court appearance on Friday, 15 May.
“The Provincial Commissioner, Lieutenant General Sello Kwena, welcomed the arrests and confiscation of goods including the firearm. He also thanked members of the community for their assistance in providing vital information which led to the arrests,” said the SAPS.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.