Former president Jacob Zuma’s daughter, Dudu Zuma-Sambudla, went on a two-day rant on Twitter defending her father and brother Duduzane Zuma, who have been criticised for their tell-all interviews recently circulating on social media.
In the interview, the former president touched on the alleged Muammar Gaddafi millions he has been accused of keeping, along with topics like state capture, Deputy President David Mabuza’s alleged poisoning plot, and the decisions the country has taken amid the Covid-19 outbreak.
Ekurhuleni Mayor Mzwandile Masina was one of the people who criticised Zuma’s interview with Duduzane, saying it was done in bad taste.
Zuma-Sambundla said the media and the public were deliberately targeting her family anytime they spoke out.
“The media and some South Africans have killed our family and buried us. You can’t kill us twice. We will tell our story and we will stand strong at the end of it all. There’s nothing more you can do to us, we have been through it all,” she said.

Media&sumSAfricans hv killed our family&buried https://t.co/S3UjJvgJLh CAN’T KILL US TWICE.We will tell our story&we will stand strong at the end of it all.There’s nothing more u can do2us,we hv bn through it all,combined we hv bn arrested,character assassinated&humiliated
— Dudu Zuma-Sambudla (@DZumaSambudla) May 6, 2020

On the recent interviews, she added: “A few weeks ago, a documentary aired on television which as usual was negative and wrong reporting on the Zuma’s.
“No one spoke up, no one raised issues of it being disturbing that lies are allowed to be reported. When father and son want to have an honest conversation with each other…our phones are ringing off the hook.”

A few weeks ago a doccie aired on TV which as usual was negative&wrong reporting on da Zuma’s,no1spoke up, no1raised issues of it being disturbing dat LIES r allowed2be reported.When father&son want2have an honest convo with each other…our phones are ringing off the hook
— Dudu Zuma-Sambudla (@DZumaSambudla) May 6, 2020

She further said that her father would no longer remain quiet about the matter.
“Why is it okay for the Zumas to be undressed and crucified in public? Why is it not okay for the Zumas to speak of their truths or their experiences?

Why is it ok for the Zuma’s to be undressed and crucified in public? Why is it NOT ok for the Zuma’s to speak of their truths or their experiences?
— Dudu Zuma-Sambudla (@DZumaSambudla) May 6, 2020

“My father has been vilified in public and slandered. He has been trialed by the public. He remained silent. We remained silent. Let him address this said public court…sikhathele! We remain silent no more! Not my father…not without a fight!

My father has been vilified in public and slandered. He has been trialed by the public. He remained silent. We remained silent. Let him address this said public court… Sikhathele! We remain silent no more! Not my father…not without a fight!
— Dudu Zuma-Sambudla (@DZumaSambudla) May 7, 2020

“Comrades are bound to sum level of secrecy in the ANC. This may stretch down to the family of the comrades, but in no way can our silence be abused. Our silence and our discipline is being interpreted as being guilty or weak. Comrades watch us suffer whilst knowing the truth, we will be silent no more!” she said.

Cdes are bound to sum level of secrecy in the ANC.This may stretch down2the family of the Cdes,but in no way can our silence be abused.Our silence&our discipline is being interpreted as being guilty or weak.Cdes watch us suffer whilst knowing the truth,we will be silent no more!
— Dudu Zuma-Sambudla (@DZumaSambudla) May 7, 2020

Meanwhile, Zuma’s corruption trial was postponed to 23 June, the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) said on Wednesday.
READ NEXT: Duduzane tells Zuma he’ll one day ask Mabuza why they no longer talk.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.