The charges of, among other things, terrorism, attempted murder, incitement to violence and public violence brought against one of the farmers in this week’s Senekal protest, serves as proof of double standards when it comes to farmers, according to the Freedom Front Plus.
In a statement, the party’s Pieter Groenewald said the charges against the farmer, who is currently still in custody pending the completion of his bail application, prove that “the prosecuting authority wants to make an example” of the accused, “and in so doing send a message to farmers and the agricultural community.”
He argues that the charges of terrorism and attempted murder are “serious and unreasonable”, pointing to bias on the part of the prosecuting authority.
Namibian anti-femicide protesters met with teargas
Demonstrators take part in a march against gender-based violence, 29 August 2020, at Constitution Hill in Johannesburg. Demonstrations also took place around South Africa including Cape Town, Pretoria and Durban. South African femicide rates are five times the global average according to statistics South Africa. Picture: Michel Bega
Namibian police on Saturday fired teargas, rubber bullets and arrested dozens of protesters in the capital, Windhoek, during the third day of nationwide demonstrations against gender based violence.
The nearly 400 protesters, predominantly Namibian young women, were marching to one of the main shopping centres in the capital city to shut it down, in order to send a message that corporate Namibia also has a duty in the fight against GBV.
The unprecedented youth-led protest that began on social media, was quickly dispersed by police and the Special Reserve Force using teargas, rubber bullets and batons.
Nigerian #Endsars protests against police brutality intensifies
Picture: Twitter / @auntyadaa
Anger has been brewing on social media after the video of the alleged killing in the southern Delta state, which authorities denied was real.
The man who filmed the video was arrested, provoking even more anger.
Hundreds of youths gathered in Ikeja in central Lagos on Friday, holding banners reading “respect for human rights” and “a more equal society”.
In Abuja, dozens of protesters also gathered and police forces used tear gas to disperse protesters, according to witness accounts.
“Our members were close to 200 in the protest. We were teargassed,” human rights activist Deji Adeyanju told the AFP news agency.
“It’s just sad that they are clamping down on peaceful civil protest.”
Protester Anita Izato posted on Twitter: “They poured tear gas on each and every one of us, it’s so hot I had to put water on my face. This is what Nigeria has turned into.”
‘We all risk being tortured’
The protest movement was initially aimed at the federal Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS), widely accused of unlawful arrests, torture and even murder, but has since broadened to include all police forces.
While the SARS unit was suspended on Sunday, groups such as Amnesty International said the government had not gone far enough, pointing to previous unsuccessful attempts to ban the force.
The #EndSARS hashtag is thought to have been first used in 2018.